---
title: Batch Normalization Notes
author: Lisette del Pino
---

<script type="text/javascript" async
  src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-MML-AM_CHTML">
</script>

Batch Normalization: (Ok, I'll admit -  this post is just a fast compilation of notes on Batch Norm I wanted to get down before I used it - will edit in the future if I learn any interesting subtleties)

## What is it?
- Method for (supposedly) increasing the performance of your neural network: 
    - In particular helps with the issue of **internal covariate shift**
    - the input data means and variances change in the internal layers during neural network training. 
      - you can see how this is a huge issue in deep neural networks - small changes in initial hidden layers get propogated and grow during training, affecting the deeper hidden layers later on! 
      - at each step, the *distribution* of your input data will change without BatchNormalization. 

## How do I Use It?
- In your neural network, add a layer where you do the Batch Norm Transform: 
  - in practice, use `keras` for building this BatchNormalization layer. 
    - [keras BatchNormalization Docs](https://www.tensorflow.org/api_docs/python/tf/keras/layers/BatchNormalization)
    - so if you're using `keras` - doing a batch norm transform is quite simply just adding a BatchNormalization layer to your model :
      - `model.add(keras.layers.BatchNormalization())`
      - if course you can tweak some parameters if you wish - see the docs for more information. 
  - if you're interested in the math and implementing it yourself (which I'm always a big fan of), that's coming up soon. 
    - for now, know that the Batch Norm Transform normalizes your data to have a $\mu = 0$ and $\sigma = 1$. 
    - also the actual normalization **per feature** for a feature $x$ in a "mini-batch" (call it $B$) looks like :
      - $$\hat{x}_B^{(p)}  \leftarrow \frac{x_B{ ^{(p)} } –  \mu_B^{(p)}}{\sqrt{ \sigma^2{ _B^{(p)} } + \epsilon}}$$
      - where $p$ represents the p^th feature. 


## Any Drawbacks?
- [Gradient Explosion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vanishing_gradient_problem) in deep neural networks. 
  - this Wikipedia page needs a lot of work, wow. Don't look at me!   

## Any Funky Things I Should Know?
- Ok, apparently there's a lot of debate regarding whether Batch Norm directly reduces the internal covariate shift phenomenon. 
  - A lot of scientists who are smarter than I am and know much more about Deep Learning say that what Batch Norm actually does is smooth the optimization function which is being solved for during training. 
    - this smoothness supposedly (I want to prove it / see a proof) allows for larger ranges of the learning rate and faster convergence. 

## Liz! Give Us An Example!
- Here is how I initialized a neural network with BatchNormalization layers (two of em!):

```python

# initialize my model 
model = Sequential()

# now we stack the layers using .add()

# layer 1 - dense layer with 8 nodes
# notice keras lets us do this without defining an input layer 
model.add(keras.layers.Dense(8))

# layer 2 - batch norm time! 
model.add(keras.layers.BatchNormalization())

# and so forth...

```

# References and More Reading :

1. [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Batch_normalization)
2. [How To Use Batch Normalization With Keras?](https://www.machinecurve.com/index.php/2020/01/15/how-to-use-batch-normalization-with-keras/#recap-about-batch-normalization)
3. [Easy To Read Keras Docs](https://faroit.com/keras-docs/1.2.0/)
4. [More Keras Docs (API)](https://keras.io/api/)